[ADVERTISEMENTS:, Keynes’s View: Causes of Depression and Cyclical Unemployment! , During 1929-33, capitalist economies of the world found themselves in the grip of depression. Such was the severity of this depression that in the United States, the rate of unemployment rose from 3.2 per cent in 1929, to 25% of the labour force in 1933.  , Besides, there was a drastic decline in Gross National Product (GNP) which fell from 315 billion dollars in 1929 to 222 billion dollars in 1933, that is, national income declined by 30 per cent during these four years period.  , ADVERTISEMENTS:, This reflects a dismal picture of the American economy during the period of Great Depression. In England as well as in other European countries also such a grave situation of severe recession and huge unemployment prevailed during this period. Before 1929-33 and even after it, recessions have occurred in these economies but they have not been as severe as that took place during 1929-33.  , Classical economists had no valid explanation of such a severe depression and large-scale cycli­cal unemployment of labour. A.C. Pigou and other economists of his view attributed this situation to the high wage rates kept by trade unions and Government. Pigou, therefore, suggested all-round cut in wages to increase employment and to remove depression and unemployment. However, this solu­tion of the problem was neither logically sound nor practical to be implemented.  , Keynes challenged this view of the classical economists and put forward a different explanation of depression and cycli­cal unemployment which was accepted by many as logical and correct. He explained his viewpoint in his now noted work, ‘General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money’. He not only gave a sound and valid explanation of depression and its associated problem of cyclical unemployment but also suggested effective policy measures to cure them.  , According to Keynes, the cause of depression and cyclical unemployment in the industrialised capitalist countries was sharp decline in private investment due to the adverse business expectations about profit making. There was a wave of pessimism prevailing among investors. The decline in private investment due to fall in marginal efficiency of capital (that is, expected rate of return) caused a fall in aggregate demand and resulted in less than full-employment equilibrium.  , ADVERTISEMENTS:, Consequently, level of output and employment fell drastically and involuntary unemployment came to prevail on a large scale. The involuntary unemployment that prevails in times of recession/depression is called cyclical unemployment and, as we have seen above, according to Keynes, it is due to deficiency of aggregate demand.  , Large fluctuations in investment, according to Keynes, are due to the uncertain basis of profit expectations on which investment decisions are made. To quote him, “We have to admit that our basis of knowledge for estimating the yield ten years hence of a Railway, a copper mine, a textile factory, the goodwill of a patent medicine amounts to little and sometimes to nothing.”  , In view of this uncertainty of future. Keynes stressed that investment decisions were greatly influenced by how optimistic or pessimistic investors feel. He used the term animal spirits to describe these pessimistic or optimistic expectations of the investors about profit earning from investment projects.  , The term animal spirits implies that there may be no good or intelligent basis for expectations on which inves­tors base their decisions. Thus the cause of depression or cyclical involuntary unemployment is the deficiency of aggregate demand due to fall in private investment those results from adverse business expectations and loss of confidence of the investor in a market economy.  , ADVERTISEMENTS:, It will be useful to explain through a diagram how a fall in investment causes a decline in level of output and employment and results in depression. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.9. It will be seen from Figure 5.9 (a) that due to adverse profit expectations or pessimism of investors, investment demand curve shifts to the left from II to I’I’. With this it will be seen that investment falls from I1 to I0 at a given rate of interest.  ,  , This fall in investment demand by I1 I0 causes a downward shift in the aggregate expenditure curve from AE to AE0 (See Fig. 5.9 (b). As a result, the equilibrium between aggregated expenditure and aggregate output which was initially at full employment level YF (which corresponds to point E where the aggregate expenditure curve AE1 intersects 45° line) falls to the new equilibrium level of income OY0.  , Therefore, the cause of depression or recession is deficiency of aggregate demand. It should also be noted, that the decline in the level of GNP or national income following the fall in investment and aggregate demand also results in decrease in level of employment in the economy and causes the emergence of large-scale cyclical unemployment.  , ADVERTISEMENTS:, It is also important to note that with help of his theory of multiplier Keynes showed that the fall in the level of national income was much greater than that of decline in investment. This can be known by comparing decline in investment demand (Δl) and fall in national income. (Δ\Y) in Figure 5.9(b).  , Explaining Great Depression (1929-33): Monetarist View:  , We have explained above Keynes’ view that great depression of 1929-33 was caused by fall in investment caused by the drastic fall in the profit expectations of business class. The decline in investment, according to him, caused aggregate demand to fall which along with the reverse working of multiplier caused conditions of depression (i.e. high rate of unemployment, substantial decrease in GNP and fall in prices) Keynes and his followers emphasise the role of fiscal policy (increase in Government expenditure and cut in taxation) to stimulate investment.  , They downplayed the role of monetary policy and in fact pointed out that monetary policy in the thirties during the depression period proved to be unimportant and ineffective. As a matter of fact, they asserted that monetary policy was tried during the depression period to revive the economy but miserably failed.  , ADVERTISEMENTS:, At times of depression, according to them, businessmen are in the grip of pessimism about future profitability of investment and more money made available through easy and liberal monetary policy would not be effective in reviving the economy. It was in this context that some Keynesian econo­mists remarked that money does not matter’ and also referred to the policy of making more credit available for investment by businesses ‘you can bring horse to water but cannot make it drink’. Thus Keynesian view prevailed during the forties and fifties almost unchallenged.  , Keynes’s view was attacked by Milton Friedman, a Nobel Laureate in economics, in the middle of fifties. Friedman and Schwartz in their important work ‘A Monetary History of the United States’ written in 1963 quoted statistical evidence from the United States, and argued that a re-examination of the Great Depression of the 1930s demonstrated that, contrary to general belief, it had been a tragic testament to the great power of monetary policy, not to its impotence’.  , They pointed out drastic decline in the quantity of money was made by Federal Reserve System (the Central Banks of the USA) from 1929 to 1933 which was responsible for severe depression in the American economy. They argued that the failure of the Federal Reserve System to prevent bank failures and the drastic decrease in money supply during 1930-1933 increased the intensity of depression. To quote them, “The US Federal Reserve System, could have prevented the decline of one-third in the quantity of money that occurred from 1929 to 1933. Had it done so, the evidence indicated, the depression would have been far milder and briefer”.  , We thus see that Freidman and other monetarists emphasise monetary policy in causing depres­sion. In fact, they go to the other extreme view ‘money alone matters’. However, in our view in recent recession during 2000-2003.the Fed Reserve System made successive cuts in rate of interest more than 7 times to revive the American economy without any success.  , For stimulating investment and growth, it cut the rate of interest even below 1 per cent, the lowest in the last 50 years but failed in its objective to overcome recession. Even in India Reserve Bank also lowered the bank rate, several times during 1998 – 2003 and reduced it to 6 per cent – the lowest in forty years to bring about industrial recovery but it had also not much effect seems.  , In the case of the USA, the signs of recovery in the first quarter of 2003-04 seem to have been the result of drastic reduction in taxation to the extent of 3.5 billion dollars and huge increase in defence expenditure for war in Iraq. Both of these are fiscal policies suggested by Keynesians that seems to have worked to start a recovery in the American economy.  , To conclude, in the view of present author the truth lies in between the two extreme views of Keynes and Friedman. Therefore, a majority of modern economists give importance to both fiscal and monetary policies for influencing investment and growth in GNR Both can be complements to each other. Furthermore, profit expectations of entrepreneurs and cost and availability of credit play a significant role in determining national income, employment and price level in the economy.,   Unemployment, You must be logged in to post a comment., Before publishing your articles on this site, please read the following pages:, 1. Content Guidelines 2. Prohibited Content 3. Plagiarism Prevention 4. Image Guidelines 5. Content Filtrations 6. TOS 7. Privacy Policy 8. Disclaimer 9. Copyright 10. Report a Violation, , , , Powered by WordPress. Designed by ]